---
layout: distill
title: Mamba-3 Part 1
description: 
tags:
giscus_comments: false
date: 2026-02-10
featured: false
thumbnail: assets/img/2026-02-10-mamba-3/mamba3-fig.png

authors:
  - name: Aakash Lahoti*
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: CMU
  - name: Kevin Y. Li*
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: CMU
  - name: Berlin Chen*
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: Princeton
  - name: Caitlin Wang*
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: Princeton
  - name: Aviv Bick
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: CMU
  - name: J. Zico Kolter
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: CMU
  - name: Tri Dao
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: Princeton, Together AI
  - name: Albert Gu
    url:
    affiliations:
      name: CMU, Cartesia AI
bibliography: mamba3.bib


# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Mamba-3 Model
  - name: Architecture
  - name: Empirical Results
    subsections:
        - name: Language Modeling
        - name: Retrieval Tasks
  - name: Kernels Here, There, and Everywhere
    subsections:
        - name: Benchmarking Latencies
        - name: Design Choices
  - name: Full Release
    
---

Since the release of Mamba-2 in mid-2024, we've seen the majority of new hybrid models and linear works build with Mamba-2 instead of Mamba-2, for good reason as well!
Mamba-2 correctly identified that training efficiency was paramount for adoption and simplified the underlying SSM mechanism to enable $2-8\times$ training boosts compared to its predecessor.

Since then, while there still is a lot of focus towards pretraining, the general zeitgeist has shifted to inference.
The scaling of post-training, especially with reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) for coding or mathematics require large amounts of model generations, aka rollouts, and most recently, agentic workflows, such as Codex, Claude Code, or even ~~Clawdbot~~ OpenClaw, have demonstrated the widespread demand in deploying models across various stacks.

Despite the clear, growing importance of of inference, many linear architectures, including Mamba-2, were developed from a training-first perspective, Mamba-3, instead, approaches architecture design from an inference-first perspective. 

## Mamba-3 Model

With the new age of inference, models should be developed to advance the Pareto frontier of model quality and inference efficiency.
The main attraction of linear models is found within their name --- their linearly-scaling compute requirements (in relation to sequenece length) associated with a fixed state size.

Unfortunately, the memory and compute strength of linear models is also a factor for their weakness.
A fixed state size, as opposed to a growing KV cache, coupled with state transition simplifications to improve training efficiency can hamper the expressivity and abilities of such models.
Futhermore, the constant compute associated with each recurrent step during inference leaves lots of compute idle throughout the memory-bound decode process.

With these issues in mind, we improve upon Mamba-2 in core ways that:
1. increase the expressivity of the SSM mechanism through a more general recurrence derived from first priciples
2. expand the state-tracking capabilities of the underlying mechanism by modeling a complex system without adjusting the underlying implementation through a clever trick, and
3. improve general performance of the model with little impact on decode latency by using mult-input, multi-output (MIMO) SSMs instead of current single-input, single-output (SISO) SSMs.

While maintaining the same state size as prior work, Mamba-3 pushes the frontier of performance while maintaining the same state size as prior work. 

Notably, all three of our methodological improvements are inspired from the more canonical control theory and state space model toolbox (we have seen some control theory people upset that "SSM" now generally refers to the structured state space models used in deep learning --- sorry!)
While most recent work fall under the linear attention or test-time training framework, we hope that our principled changes demonstrate that there is a lot more to be discovered (or rediscovered) from the good ole fundamentals.

## Architecture

We've revamped the architecture a bit to make things smoother and more in-line with standard models.

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2026-02-10-mamba-3/mamba3-arch.png" title="Mamba-3 Architecture" caption="Mamba-3 Architecture" %}

We added in QKNorm (or BCNorm in this case), which we found to also empirically stabilize training of pure Mamba-3 models.
The RMSNorm introduced in Mamba-2 is rendered optional with the new norm, but we find that it should probably be kept for hybrid models due to length extrapolation capabilties; more on this later!

We were also able to get rid of the pesky short convolution with a combination of biases on B and C and our new discretization-based recurrence (which itself is implicit conv, refer to the second part of our blog for more on this).
The short causal convolution, now used heavily by the majority of linear models <d-cite key='gu2024mambalineartimesequencemodeling'></d-cite><d-cite key='dao2024transformersssmsgeneralizedmodels'></d-cite><d-cite key='yang2025gateddeltanetworksimproving'></d-cite><d-cite key='sun2025learninglearntesttime'></d-cite>, was first popularized by Mamba-1, which used it as a simpler version of the shift SSM from H3 <d-cite key='fu2023hungryhungryhipposlanguage'></d-cite>, itself inspired by the "smeared" induction heads work by Anthropic <d-cite key='olsson2022context'></d-cite>.
{% details How/why can the short conv be replaced? %}
Ultimately, we're not exactly sure!

We have a couple of hypothesis of what this might be happening, some more mechanistic than others.
One is that the additional biases upweights the "attention" applied to the most recent tokens, which is similar to the mechanistic merging of tokens done by a short conv.

Based on the SSD framework proposed in Mamba-2, the output of an SSM depends on the summed dot products between the current $C$ and all previous $B$'s with increasing decay the further back.
The addition of biases applied to both $B, C$ would mean that the dot product would be larger on average and may mitigate the decay to some degree for the nearest tokens.
{% enddetails %}

Within the diagram, you'll also notice a couple of new components, namely the RoPE and MIMO projections (the new recurrence is also there, just hidden away in the SSM component).
We discuss the motivation and implementation of these in greater detail in the second part of our blog, but for now, just think of them as standalone architectural improvements that individually contribute to improving the model's performance and/or capabilities.

## Empirical Results

We evaluate our final Mamba-3 model to other popular linear alternatives and the Transformer baseline.
Our overall architecture now adopts interleaved MLP layers, but still maintains a 6:6 mixer-to-MLP ratio from before.

### Language Modeling

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2026-02-10-mamba-3/evals.png" title="Downstream LM Evals" caption="Downstream Language Modeling Evaluations for Pretrained Models" %}

We find that our new Mamba-3 model outperforms the prior Mamba-2 model and strong linear attention alternatives on language modeling across various pretrained model scales.
Our MIMO variant of Mamba-3 further boosts accuracy on our downstream tasks by more than 1 percentage point over the regular Mamba-3 at the 1B scale, but this increase is associated with longer training times, but not longer decoding latencies! 

{% details How can training costs go up but not inference? %}
This dichotomy can be traced back to the respective compute versus memory-bound nature of training and inference.
The training of linear models has been optimized to lots of tensor cores (one of the core motivations for Mamba-2), but during decoding, the constant compute requirements at each timestep make it so that large parts of the hardware remain cold.

Thus, if we design architectures around just increasing the amount of FLOPs needed for each time-step, inference is still fine since we can just use some of the idle cores, but not so much for training.
{% enddetails %}

### Retrieval Tasks

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2026-02-10-mamba-3/retrieval.png" title="Retrieval Tasks" caption="Real-world and Synthetic Retrieval Tasks" %}

Given their fixed state size, linear models under perform their Transformer counterparts on retrieval-based tasks.
Given this deficit but overall strong modeling performance, we predict that linear layers will be *predominately used* in conjunction with self-attention layers in the future, at least for language modeling.
The combination of the general memory-like nature of linear layers coupled with the exact database-like storage of self-attention's KV cache has been shown empirically to outperform pure models while enabling significant memory and compute savings <d-cite key='waleffe2024empiricalstudymambabasedlanguage'></d-cite>.

As expected, within pure models, the Transformer reigns supreme, but the Mamba-3 class performs well within sub-quadratic alternatives.
Interestingly, the addition of MIMO further improves retrieval performance without increasing the state size.

The combination of linear layers with self-attention in hybrid models enables better retrieval capabilties compared to a vanilla Transformer.
However, we highlight that the exact way that these linear models interact with self-attention is not fully understood.

For instance, we find that the reintroduction of the pre-output projection normalization found within Mamba-2 to Mamba-3 improves the length generalization performance on the synthetic NIAH tasks at the slight cost of in-context real-world retrieval tasks.
Furthermore, even the details of the returned norm such as placement, e.g., pre-gate vs post-gate, and type, grouped vs regular, has non-insignificant changes in accuracy on certain tasks, such as FDA and SWDE.

## Kernels Here, There, and Everywhere

We're excited to see what people build with Mamba-3.
To help facilitate this, we are open-sourcing our kernels, which are on par in terms of speed with the original Mamba-2 Triton kernels.

### Benchmarking Latencies

<h4 style="color: red!important;">THESE NUMBERS MIGHT CHANGE</h4>

**Prefill Latency**

| Model | n=512 | 1024 | 2048 | 4096 | 16384 |
|---|---:|---:|---:|---:|---:|
| vLLM (Llama-3.2-1B) | **0.26±0.01** | **0.52±0.00** | **1.08±0.02** | **2.08±0.04** | **1.52±0.03** |
| Gated DeltaNet | 0.48±0.00 | 0.95±0.00 | 1.90±0.00 | 3.79±0.00 | 1.91±0.00 |
| Mamba-2 | 0.48±0.00 | 0.96±0.00 | 1.91±0.00 | 3.81±0.01 | 1.92±0.01 |
| Mamba-3 (SISO) | 0.48±0.00 | 0.95±0.00 | 1.90±0.00 | 3.80±0.00 | 1.91±0.00 |

**Prefill+Decode Latency**

| Model | n=512 | 1024 | 2048 | 4096 | 16384 |
|---|---:|---:|---:|---:|---:|
| vLLM (Llama-3.2-1B) | 4.45±0.12 | 9.60±0.16 | 20.37±0.25 | 58.64±1.23 | 122.06±0.08 |
| Gated DeltaNet | 4.52±0.01 | 9.04±0.02 | 18.07±0.03 | 36.14±0.06 | 71.66±0.23 |
| Mamba-2 | 4.62±0.01 | 9.24±0.01 | 18.48±0.03 | 36.94±0.06 | 57.90±0.23 |
| Mamba-3 (SISO) | **4.33±0.01** | **8.64±0.01** | **17.29±0.03** | **34.57±0.06** | **53.97±0.28** |

<figure>
    <figcaption class="caption">
        Prefill and prefill+decode (same token count for both prefill and decode) latency across sequence lengths on a single H100-SXM 80GB GP.
        Model scale was 1.5B and a batch size of 128 was used for all sequence lengths except for 16k, which used a batch size of 16.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

When comparing models at the 1.5B scale, Mamba-3 (SISO variant) achieves the fastest prefill + decode latency across all sequence lengths, outperforming Mamba-2, Gated DeltaNet, and even the Transformer with its highly optimized vLLM ecosystem.

Mamba-3's Triton-based prefill maintains nearly identical performance to Mamba-2, demonstrating that the new discretization and data-dependent RoPE embeddings, do not introduce additional overhead.
The strong decode performance can be partially attributed to the CuTe DSL implementation, which was made significantly easier by the simplicity of Mamba-3 components.
<h4 style="color: red!important;">FIGURE OUT IF SISO DECODE IS CUTE OR TRITON</h4>

### Design Choices
We spent a lot of time thinking how to make the kernels as fast as possible without compromising on ease-of-use.
We ended up using the following stack: Triton, TileLange, and CuTe DSL.

The use of Triton was quite an easy choice.
It's pretty much standard for architecture development (the great [flash linear attention](https://github.com/fla-org/flash-linear-attention) repo is purely in PyTorch and Triton) for good reason, as it enables better performance than standard PyTorch by enabling controlled tiling and kernel fusion while being a platform-agnostic language.
<!-- We use this feature pretty extensively in our implementations, e.g., fusing the ROPE into the SSM update to minimize data movement and reducing launch overhead. -->
Triton also has some pretty nifty features, like PTX (a GPU-oriented assembly language) injection and its Tensor Memory Accelerator (on Hopper GPUs) for bulk, asynchronous transfers from global to shared memory.

Our MIMO prefill kernels were developed with TileLang instead.
The additional projections corresponding with the variant resulted in larger amounts of shared memory requirements --- unfortunately, Triton didn't provide the granularity of memory control we desired, which led to poor hardware utilization and higher latencies.
TileLang, a lower-level language, allowed us to explicitly declare and control shared-memory tiles and create register fragments, reusing memory more efficiently and controlling register spillage effectively.

Since we've been hampering on the importance of inference and decode, we decided to use CuTE DSL for our decode kernels.
Through its Python interface, we're able to generate kernels built on top of CUTLASS, NVIDIA’s high-performance CUDA C++ library for dense linear algebra.
Here, we have fine-grain control over tensor layouts and warp specialization, to a larger degree than even TileLang!

Importantly, these implementations across varying levels of GPU abstraction are made possible by the underlying algorithmic design of Mamba-3's simple, lightweight additions and their clever instantiations.
We discuss details such as the exact fusion structure and kernel DSL more in depth in our full release.

## Full Release
Glad you made it to the end of Part 1!
There were a lot of details regarding our kernels and experimental results and ablations we didn't have time to cover in this post, but don't fret!
Everything can be found in our paper at XXX, and the kernels have been open-sourced at [mamba-ssm](https://github.com/state-spaces/mamba)!

Up next, the [second (and final) part]({% post_url 2026-02-10-mamba3-part2 %}) of the series delves into the three core improvements to Mamba-3 and their SSM foundations.
It also gives a quick recap on changes between Mamba-1, Mamba-2, and Mamba-3, and gives some directions we're especially interested in.

